one of the oldest playlists on this  channel  is the playlist on friendship  discussing the nature of friendship  in our culture we have so many songs  that are sung  so many movies that are made about love  about romantic relationships  and it's rare for people to put  the same level of energy the same level  of effort into friendships but  friendships  very simply  define what you can  and cannot do  in your life  you could say especially when you're  young  but  you think it doesn't influence  middle-aged people you think it doesn't  influence  old people  what you can and cannot do can you play  tennis  if you have three friends who play  tennis yeah you can  can you learn how to play tennis can you  get good at it can you get into it yeah  okay can you can you learn chinese  can you get involved with politics at  city hall if you have three friends who  already are  involved with politics at sea hall if  you have three friends who already are  learning chinese  you know even the types of television  people watch i mean things with a very  low level of effort you know well yeah  if you have friends who already  understand these things you know these  things hey do you guys think any of you  could uh  buy an airplane ticket and go to  cambodia and start doing humanitarian  work if you have a friend who already  has  lived in cambodia that's not so  intimidating anymore right you have a  friend who can already talk you through  the paperwork you need to do or whatever  you know  yeah and as you've heard me say many  times in this channel what you can do  as an intellectual what you can do as a  sort of  political activist political lobbyist as  a person who cares about politics and  wants to change future of the world you  know  friendship matters it matters far more  than the attention we pay to it right  and perhaps some of us  suffer  from obsessing over  sexual relationships but maybe we also  suffer from paying too little attention  to friendships now  i think nobody in this audience will  doubt  that our sexual relationships  are primarily rooted in instinct  you know not reason  [Laughter]  whether or not you're attracted to  someone  is instinctual what you do about that  attraction is a very different question  how you cope with it or what kind of  relationship you create out of it and  all kinds of questions that you may  answer intellectually and  philosophically but how you actually  live your life how you conduct yourself  sexually romantically who you fall in  love with marry how you live  but  there is a very deep level on which  i as a heterosexual can never be  attracted  to a member of the same sex and i have  certainly known gay people who could  never be attracted to the opposite sex  and of course there are bisexual people  who can do it all  you know  and i have known people who could only  be attracted to fat people and there are  people who can only be attracted to  skinny people you know there are more  peculiar elements to those instinctual  relations and i met a guy who had spent  his whole life chasing after  chinese women  and i was talking about  my philosophical attitude towards this  because i said look i grew up in a city  i grew up in toronto where there were  plenty of chinese women plenty of korean  women around a couple japanese women too  like i grew up with you know in high  school and what have you and just  surrounding me in the city and i said  i've never had any fascination towards  never in any attraction or never my type  and the interesting thing about this  guy's reply to me was he had grown up in  a small town where there were absolutely  zero asian people this is somewhere in  the united states where it's like 90  percent white  five percent hispanic five percent black  or so there are in america in the united  states but there are a lot of towns like  that like you know it's just not a  cosmopolitan place at all  anyway but he said that when he  reflected on his life nevertheless  growing up in an almost entirely white  community in school and so on the women  he was attracted to in high school  looked like they could have been asian  like they looked like they could have  been chinese or japanese they were white  women with certain kind of facial  features and their their body type and  so on and so forth  and he knew  what it was he found attractive about  them and that was years before he'd ever  meet uh asian women or start to develop  an interest in asian culture and so on  and so forth so  we all admit when we talk about romantic  relationships that we're talking about  instinct  not exclusively  but very fundamentally and i think  people don't want to pay the same kind  of attention to the instincts  that are involved with friendship okay  why why why do human beings need friends  should be clear  why do human beings  feel  that they need friends i don't mean  rationally i don't mean when you think  about it when you reflect on it  i mean  why are we a species for whom  the most serious kind of punishment  is to be locked in a prison cell in  isolation solitary confinement which  i've seen some people argue seriously  they feel solitary confinement is a form  of torture  i heard an interview once with a man  um and  he was being interrogated that way he  was being turned to confess to a crime  he hadn't committed and he really said  in his own experience he felt that  solitary confinement was a kind of  torture anyway he described the exact  scenario of what he was locked into he  was in a completely dark room where he  couldn't see or hear anybody or  something you know well you know  i am not the kind of person who uh  liberally  appeals to  uh evolutionary psychology i think we  have to be tremendously  self-aware and self-disciplined when we  make claims alluding to a revolutionary  past i think we have to be aware of our  tendency to indulge in  self-justification  rationalization and excuse making by  pointing to a kind of fictional  construct of what we imagine our  evolutionary past was and what it how we  ought to live our lives now given that  evolutionary past so without digressing  into at any length you guys probably  know  there are men who uh  you know  men who try to sleep with a hundred  different women a year  and who justify this  through their notion of of evolution  they say oh well this is how we were  evolved to behave and you can talk to  another man who believes that one man  should marry and commit to just one  woman and raise children with her and he  can justify that he can justify monogamy  by appealing to evolutionary psychology  and so on all kinds of different  extremes  i've known people in anthropology who  very seriously believe that everyone was  secretly homosexual i you know there  were people who believed everyone is  secretly a closeted homosexual and thus  heterosexuality is some kind of  repressed  uh  dysfunction and there were of course  people of the opposite stripe people who  tried to make heterosexuality a  definitive aspect of sanity or normalcy  and that somehow homosexuality uh you  know was delegitimized as being the  result of repression or trauma that but  that we really these people weren't  really homosexual and then i think the  although in some ways it's the craziest  position of all um  it's at least empirically uh harder to  debunk there's also the popular popular  enough notion that everyone is secretly  bisexual  but that so thus thus surrendering both  homosexuals and heterosexuals uh  repressed dysfunctional people on the  premise that everyone secretly and  inwardly is is  bisexual in their inclinations i in case  you guessed i subscribe to none of these  schools of thought i don't i don't  support any of these but my point being  evolutionary psychology it's a very  pliant excuse making mechanism and you  have to be really keenly aware of what  your own agenda is what your own desires  are what you might be making excuses for  consciously or or unconsciously in uh in  asking these questions and then  proposing your own your own answers to  them  so i do notice guys i do notice  uh  16 people in the audience and only eight  thumbs up  i think we had about 20 thumbs up before  so if you change your mind you can give  it a thumbs up now and then you don't  like the direction this conversation is  going you might not know that you can  click on the thumbs up again and undo  the thumbs up but clicking on thumbs up  helps more people uh join the crowd  while the discussion is uh is ongoing  and uh  i it also people discover the video  later on so i do like having a live  audience i do like performing with the  pressure uh provided to me by having a  live audience this way  exe.exe says  off-topic comment but i thought you took  that two-week break because you were  watching the kenosha trial so guys um  if you support me on patreon you'll know  you'll know more about what's going on  in my life but no i stopped uploading  videos for two weeks  just because  um  i felt that  one video i'd uploaded was especially  important i really wanted more people to  see my video about uh philosophy and  politics of socrates i still think it's  a tremendously important video if you  haven't seen it uh go back and watch it  but even during those two weeks i  actually continued uploading videos  recording and uploading videos i just  didn't publish them and actually i have  a backlog now i have several videos that  haven't been published yet but that i  created during that period of time so  anyway thanks larry uh shows up the  socrates video and says that it was very  good so every so often i do that i know  um you know guys i'm happy to have you  all in the audience but i know i have  viewers who really do value my channel  but they can only they only have enough  time to come and watch a video once  every two weeks there are people who've  loved my channel for years but they  watch every tenth video or something and  i'm uploading so much that  something will get buried something will  get missed so uh every so often i have  to slow myself down although yeah i  create in terms of my creative process  basically yeah i want to be making  videos all the time including this one  so i think thanks for joining me but i  think you can imagine like if this video  now we're limited just to the people who  are not at work today who are able to  come and watch this video today you know  uh that would be a tremendous constraint  but if you're uploading and publishing  new videos every day  some of your videos are gonna get are  gonna get buried  um  anyway so the most the most basic  premise here uh that i'm borrowing from  evolutionary psychology  is just that there is a good reason why  human beings are uncomfortable being  alone there is a good reason why even  they perceive solitary confinement as a  kind of torment or torture or  or punishment and i would say that is  because we are not evolved to be  solitary predators  there are innumerable species both on  land and in the ocean  that have no social instincts whatsoever  they don't live in a troop they don't  live in a pack they don't help one  another they don't assist one another  whatsoever and the only time they have  positive contact with their own species  is for sexual reproduction  so normally when they're in heat or  something they send a chemical signal  and they meet and they mate and then  that's it you know there are innumerable  species on this earth that follow that  that kind of pattern  well human beings are not quite  pack animals um  we don't  naturally form into flocks  you know  we don't naturally form into schools in  the sense of schools of fish  however  it is impossible for just one person  to survive  in the wild  for long  if you are one person alone if you do  not have a troop  if you do not have a clan  if you do not have some kind of extended  family like organization of people who  help you and work with you and take care  of you  um  [Music]  the common cold  could be the end of your life you know  if you are truly living alone  in a cave in prehistoric conditions or  in a hut in the middle of the jungle a  very minor injury a very minor illness  could be the end of your life because  you have nobody to take care of you  during that that short span of time so  you guys know i am  i have experience living in the tropics  and i i was living in one of the last  parts there were people still some of  the indigenous people were still living  in tribal conditions that was  disappearing year by year the last  people with traditional lifestyles were  moving to the city and so and so on you  know um so if you go there and hell i  don't know how many people still still  live that way but there were still  people hunting with crossbows  when i was there  and i think one of the things um  we forget  is just how different life is before  refrigeration  as as a vegan  i was very interested in  traditional methods of growing things  like soybeans i was very interested in  the vegan aspects of the diet i guess i  still am  well guess what you can grow soybeans in  that climate you can grow them quite  effortlessly  and they go bad in like two days  they become poisonous elected there's no  refrigeration there's no preservative  there's no food processing like okay you  can take the beans out of the field  you've got to eat them now  and you know you start to realize why  there's so much emphasis on certain  types of food  that can be kept even if it's only for  like two weeks  um in the tropics potatoes do not last  very long you know there were kind of  bacteria and things that there are  tiny  somehow find their way into your  potatoes you know potatoes do not last  that long so on and so forth so yeah and  and by the way again i am vegan  but you start to see why meat was so  important for survival because it was  possible to take me i've seen this  my ex-wife also was an anthropologist it  was with groups emerging from tribal  conditions they would just kill  something and hang it over the fireplace  and with no other preservatives just the  smoke  rising they would they would cure meat  and it could lie it could last for six  months  anyway my point here again is not to  glorify the conditions of our ancient  ancestors and it's also not to present  you with a kind of  [Music]  rationalization of my own choices my own  values i don't think that um  you know evolutionary psychology  vindicates the choices i've made in my  life i don't think it vindicates my  schedule values i think if anything  evolutionary psychology helps to explain  why people like myself are so alone  you know  and i embrace that and i accept that and  i understand that there is strange kind  of strength necessary a strange kind of  psychological and emotional resilience  necessary to really live your life alone  to really live in defiance  of social conventions and to accept the  consequence of that fact now you know to  give give a very simple example if you  live in a predominantly catholic society  and you reject the catholic church  you're likely to find yourself  alone now maybe maybe you can find the  company of other dissident intellectuals  who also reject the catholic church  maybe that's the most wonderful thing  for you but start adding up all the  conventions all the social demands on  you that you're rejecting and you start  explaining more and more why it is  you're alone and when you look at the  fear of being alone the terror people  have of loneliness that i'm here  suggesting to you is rooted in our  instincts as rooted in evolutionary  psychology in a way totally unrelated to  the romantic  erotic reproductive instincts that we  spend so much time examining and  analyzing that we spend so much time  singing songs about and dancing dances  about and talking to our psychiatrists  and therapists about we all obsess over  human sexuality this way right but  there's much less attention paid to  loneliness  the instinct to avoid loneliness the  instinct to conform with the most  unreasonable social and political  demands you know like that if you live  in a society of communists to be a  communist then if you live in a society  of fascists to be a fascist if you live  in a society of catholics or muslims to  conform that if you live in a society  where everyone watches a certain sport  everyone watches football soccer or  baseball to conform and go along with  the crowd even if you personally do not  find it entertaining or interesting  i've known people like that  um  those instincts the instincts around the  fear of loneliness and the way people  approach and cling to friendship right  maybe that's something we're not we're  not  examining nearly enough  and um  i'm just taking a moment to let you  just take a moment to let your comments  guys  okay so just interesting atlanta richard  says that he doesn't like the direction  this discussion is going in but he's  still committed to knowing my opinion  about it okay well look richard um i  doubt what you have to say is criticism  why don't you just tell me what's on  your mind because i mean if there's  something i'm guessing there's something  you want me to address or there's some  particular question within this topic  you want me to talk about and if you  mention it it might not be the first  thing i i talk about maybe it's gonna be  the last thing i talk about i can but i  can pay attention to whatever your uh  you know whatever your interest is that  you think i'm i'm moving i'm moving away  from in the direction that i'm that i'm  taking in this this video  so look uh a comeback something i said  earlier  in the video  i'm not  i'm not glorifying  loneliness here i'm not glorifying being  alone i'm not glorifying being a defiant  individualist i think i said very  briefly  that the friends you have  determine what you can  do in life now i don't have to digress  into a whole lot of  examples here but if you've been  watching my channel for years at one  point somebody wrote into me  asking for particular examples of vegan  activism that wouldn't be destructive  and wouldn't destroy their life whatever  and one of the examples i remember  discussing at length was setting up a  pancake stand and actually getting the  the proper legal permission from the  city government or whichever part of  government handles it we are where you  actually get a pancake stand or a waffle  stand  and set that up and with maybe five of  your colleagues you know you can give  away  you can sell them if you want you can  sell them for one dollar each you can  sell them at a loss i guess that's  better the giveaway so sell them for one  dollar so for much less than they really  would cost and with each you know  pancake the way you put it you can give  the person a leaflet and say look this  pancake doesn't contain any eggs or  dairy it's possible to make pancakes or  waffles with eggs dairy and here's why  because we're vegan and we think this is  really important here's why i just gave  that as an example i'm not saying this  is the world's most prominent example  okay do you have five friends who will  do that with you do you have people in  your life who trust you and can work  with you that way um  i can give examples from totally  different times in my life i gave a  proposal to professor richard gombrich  many years ago if you don't know who  richard gombridge is he was at that time  the most powerful scholar in  buddhist studies of research related to  buddhism and uh for a period of like 50  years he was the most i don't know if he  still is today but whatever he had a  long career of being a very powerful and  influential person  and i put together this proposal for a  kind of magazine  and i just mentioned  so the magazine was going to do a few  different things  but one of the things i said to him  because even in my own conversation i  keep i kept mentioning to him books that  had been published he'd never heard of  and he's just he's a great and famous  scholar in the field he doesn't know  about the new books that are coming out  related to buddhism and what have you  that's partly because many of the books  are published in india some of them are  published in hong kong it's it's hard to  stay on top of that stuff but i was and  i worked in the publishing industry so i  really knew oh but do you know there's a  new book published about that here and  then  so  one of the driving  forces for this magazine was to give you  an update whether it was every month for  every three months however often this  magazine was here are all the new books  that came out and i said you know  including the books published in russia  you know what it means  you know there are places like this  which is just not that easy to find out  unless you take the time what are the  new books being published in this field  they have brief not even book reviews  but brief notices about all the new  books uh coming out in this this area of  scholarship and he got tremendously  excited i mean he he was mostly spending  his life around very boring people very  pouring people with phds and a certain  kind of pot-smoking lackadaisical hippie  who decides to get a degree in buddhist  studies i mean he was he was around  people who were not ambitious and not  hard-working and not motivated so he was  very excited about this idea of me  setting up a magazine  but you know it was just funny because  in his mind  he thought i'd be doing this all alone  with no encouragement and no help from  it's like no like if i were i wouldn't  tell you like  [Laughter]  why do you think i'm talking to you why  do you think i made this presentation i  made like slides like a powerpoint  presentation you know  gave him this [ __ ] it's like and and by  the way with that one you don't need  money i mean 100 bucks or something it's  it's going to be almost compared to  eating out in a restaurant every month  it's not going to be very much money a  little bit more than zero money but no  no i need a couple people to work with  me like you know three people five  people 10 people would be great no no i  need colleagues i need friends who will  do this  you know  what you can  do  and what you cannot do  it's crucially shaped by friendship let  me just say briefly  kevin smith  what's the difference between me and  kevin smith okay kevin smith had enough  friends  to make the movie clerks basically  everyone in that film it's notorious he  engages in nepotism and hiring his  friends whatever he had enough and i'm i  am not saying they were close personal  friends i don't believe they were i've  heard him talk about it i they were  people he kind of sort of knew from the  neighborhood he grew up in he made phone  calls around said oh hey you know a  couple a couple of people in that film  were his close friends and a couple of  people became his close friends later  because they made the movie with him but  you know he was calling up you know  distant acquaintances to appear in this  weird movie okay  how many people do you think i could get  to collaborate with me to participate in  making a movie now  in this city in canada the city i've  been living in on and off for like eight  years right i came and went but still  i've got i've got significant roots in  the city now right i lived here and then  i went to taiwan i lived here you know i  made trips back and forth but still  [Laughter]  so  the friends you have  shape what you can do and the friends  you don't have are an insuperable  obstacle right they really define  what you cannot do now i just say going  beyond this i'm not going to go on and  on with examples  but um  do you guys think i have what it takes  to be a drug dealer  i don't  i'm lacking one crucial variable  i don't have the friends  if you already have friends  who are drug dealers and people  you trust  people you trust with money people who  trust i'm going to give you this  thousand dollars and you're not going to  just take it and run away people you  trust not to backstab you literally you  know not to rob you not to double cross  you not to turn you into the police not  to snitch like there's a pretty  significant level of  you know trust required by that that's  the crucial variable for whether or not  you can you know become a drug dealer  okay now think back to the person you  were when you were 14 years old  at age 14  could you have become a medical doctor  obviously i mean in that year but could  you have started the process of studying  to become a medical doctor all of you  know for so many of those professions  the most crucial variable is do you  already have a parent or an aunt or an  uncle who became a medical doctor do you  have an older brother or sister  if you have a friend if you have someone  who helps you  so  far more important than money you know  there are rich people who become drug  dealers there are poor people who come  to our children's right there are rich  people who become medical doctors there  are poor people who become medical  doctors i just read the autobiography of  a guy who was born into dire poverty and  he became a medical doctor i could tell  his whole story and his  his family connections were a crucial  part of that um long story  you know  the friends you have define what you can  do and what you can't do  even  i didn't i didn't have any concept of  studying latin or greek when i was a kid  if i'd had a friend who was interested i  feel like again you can just imagine if  i had a friend to even take an intro  intro to latin you know if i'd had an  older brother or a friend or something  just even imagining something being a  possible career right that's gonna come  from  friends  and your own sense of comfort and taking  that risk and making that investment and  going to that place so i i just  mentioned that some of your comments  seem to me to uh  seem to me to reflect the assumption  that i was gonna glorify being a defiant  isolated individualist someone who  throws off social conventions and says  no i'm not going to watch  soccer i'm not going to watch baseball  you know no i'm not going to compromise  with the catholic church i'm not going  to be part of these things that's not  what i'm saying at all i'm starting by  talking about evolutionary psychology  and  the demands that we maybe don't even  articulate to ourselves in private the  demands we have of friends and that we  that we make friends and that we  struggle against isolation with  something that i think is rooted  ultimately in an instinctual fear of  death the fearing that if the fear  the the fear that if we are alone if we  are truly isolated if we don't have a  pack if we don't have a  a clan or a tribe  that we will die  um that we can be alone for a couple of  days  but that's about it that then we start  to get antsy and to be looking around  for who were our friends did you want  you want to jump in  i just wanted to say something that  spoke to me that you said  was a comment made that as children  what friends we have will determine what  we can do and you use this example of  learning to play tennis if you have a  friend  that plays tennis with you then you can  play tennis but playing alone  yeah right  not having any friends who play tennis  with you then that will preclude you  from  playing tents  um so as children we we are able to  remember times when you know we wanted  to play and nobody was available i know  this is a very basic thing but it  doesn't stop after  your childhood a lot of people think  like well once you're an adult you get  involved with raising children and you  get involved with your job but it still  really matters uh to anything else that  you want to do outside of truth  and even including those endeavors if  you want  so yeah i just i just say like that to  me was um  yes  thinking about the difference between  like  how you do friendship as a child  more kind of evolutionary psychology  but so melissa and i both regard playing  tennis as meaningless by the way we're  not using it as some wonderful positive  example  but if you want to play tennis and if  you want to become good at playing you  want to become proficient you want to be  an excellent tennis player having  friends who play tennis  of course to motivate you  you know as opposed to doing it once a  month or once a year that you're really  getting out and training and improving  your your skills and so on it's even  more important if you join when someone  is 40 years old like you you have  someone who's four years old and maybe  they're trying to lose weight and  improve their muscle mass so they start  playing tennis well if you don't already  have friends who play tennis that's  going to be incredibly hard to do it's  going to be incredibly hard to put in  the effort and so on uh to do it in that  sense alone  now obviously you can go and pay someone  to be your coach  but it's not the same  it's really not now you know okay so  that's tennis  hey guys have any of you published  poetry  do you think  poetry is motivated by money  in the year 2021  nobody makes money out of poetry nobody  nobody makes money under poetry you have  to know people  who publish poetry you have to have a  circle and by the way you can start your  own journal you can start your own  publishing house it's it's pretty cheap  if you have five friends who share your  aesthetic taste in poetry you have the  same idea about just five so it'd be six  of you uh the six of you have the same  sense of why you should be writing and  publishing poetry like maybe it's a  political  you have some political motivation maybe  it's just a sense of the beauty of the  language or something okay now now you  guys can start publishing a journal you  can start collaborating and publishing  each other's books but if not you know  what i mean in this sense right now in  the 21st century there's no such thing  as one poet you need to have a troop of  poets you need to have a tribe of poets  to make anything happen and again what  would motivate you to keep writing  poetry and producing it to a to a higher  and higher standard so again obviously  i'm not saying this is not true of of  all forms of writing and publishing but  i think poetry is an especially an  especially good example hey guys you  want to put on a performance  of julius caesar william shakespeare's  julius do you have enough friends to  think about it and you know you you can  talk about money  but there are a lot of things you can't  you can't buy you can't pay for the type  of camaraderie and cooperation you get  by doing a project like that with  friends so  friendship is productive  you know and the lack of friendship  the possibility for you having too few  friends snuffs out your creativity  snuffs out you know the the potential  you have uh for production in your life  or any kind again whether that's  studying think about how [ __ ] boring  it is to study chemistry you know when  chemistry is a prerequisite to going  into medicine to become a medical doctor  in our terrible education system okay if  you have friends who are willing to  study for the chemistry exam with you  now it's more like tennis you know  really you know so what you can and  can't do even intellectually it's it's  shaped by friendship in this in this  profound way and you're you're enabled  and you receive positive reinforcement  through friendship so and so forth and  i'm just telling you honestly you can't  pay a tutor to do that if you pay a  tutor and they happen to fall in love  with you that's if you pay a tutor and  they become your best friend that's  different but with many many of these  things it's this profoundly important  constraint that people i think people  don't want to examine it for exactly the  reasons we're going to get into  in this video because it reveals certain  kinds of weaknesses you have it  reveals the extent of your alienation  from the culture you're a part of you  know what i'm saying like you know  you know i just say there are a lot of  really tough things to reflect on when  you think about friendship the friends  you've had the friends you've lost you  know so forth so you know i want to  rehearse something that i discussed with  melissa last night  and  i'm gonna ask you i can't remember  anyone ever talking about this honestly  so i don't know if there's a taboo about  this or it's just i have never heard it  but i've never heard about this  in fiction in non-fiction  in someone else's youtube video i've  never had a conversation with us but you  know melissa mentioned me last night  that she still has dreams about people  she was friends with  in high school  and i think occasionally university  people you people you had some close  connection with at that age in that  stage of your life  and she has vivid dreams about them and  not every night but once in a while  even when intellectually she is aware  these are people she would not want to  be friends with today like you know  there are various things wrong with them  it's it's not a coincidence they haven't  been in touch and i immediately respond  to this with several  vivid examples of my own of people where  i had some kind of close  cooperative bond with them we were  friends at a certain age and then they  appeared in my dreams for years and  years afterward  even after i mean in some cases i had  really formed the judgment  that this person was despicable they  were untrustworthy immoral there's  someone i'd never want to talk to again  i'd never want to be friends with again  um you know just just briefly many of  the people i went to high school with  got involved in drugs and alcohol  to a great extent  some of them went to jail  you know  um there was this woman who was in love  with me and she became a stripper  i don't know she was a stripper for a  year or two i don't think it was for her  career in life or something you know  people took on different very strange  directions with their lives after they  knew after they were they were part of  my life and one of the examples i gave  melissa was this girl i never had sex  with her i'm saying girl because we were  both young we were both teenagers  whatever she was a girl i was a boy but  a young woman whatever i say but you  know i had this friendship with a girl  where we never had sex but we did sleep  together literally  and um we had a lot we had this close  friendship for a time with this kind of  intense friendship and at one point she  actually washed my hair i was back when  i had hair she washed and combed my hair  like you know we touched each other and  spent time together and talked about our  lives and stuff and for something like  five years after i stopped talking to  her  she did appear in my dreams you know and  sometimes very vividly you know um by  the way sorry these were not erotic  dreams i was not fantasizing about  having sex with her i could describe  some of these dreams you know  now  that girl  she became the most despicable person  imaginable to me  and i did talk to her several times  after the friendship stopped we bumped  into each other and talked she's someone  i consider  totally immoral  really really disgusting  uh to me she's someone i don't just  morally disapprove of her in the  abstract i can say to you honestly she  makes my skin crawl  and i'm gonna choose to leave it  anonymous  um  but there are some youtube videos of her  she's not like a conventional youtuber  but there were several youtube videos of  her talking and before i made this video  i went and listened to a couple of them  for just a couple of minutes and you  know it's i get the feeling  like  she is she is really though and you know  i already knew that you know a million  years ago okay you know  my my hypothesis is here i think we do  have really deep-seated instincts to  form cooperative  connections to other people and to work  with them and live with them and support  them and i think that so what age was  maybe 16 17 when i had that relationship  with that girl  and again i didn't have sex  um  i think there's an instinct to form a  kind of tribe to form a clan to form a  bond that's going to last the rest of  your life where this is a person you can  literally sleep with  this is a person who can wash you and  clothe you and feed you i think i  probably did cook with her a couple  times  nothing nothing elaborate but we ate  together it's someone you trust this you  know this is someone who can guard you  while you're sleeping you you trust that  they're not going to attack you in your  sleep or rob you in your sleep you know  and again in terms of evolutionary time  i do not think we're evolved to form  such  deep  intellectual and ethical relationships  such as we demand of one another such  such as i demand of all the women in my  life and so i i have very high standards  for my male friends also you know  ethically and intellectually and so on  you know i have these very very high  very very many standards i don't think  we're demand to have pardon me i do not  think we are evolved to be so demanding  as that  i think we are just evolved to be  seeking out  and then trying to maintain for the rest  of our lives relationships with people  who can  work on a farm with us  who can gather food and gather firewood  where you have that level of trust and  cooperation  uh  but not and again this is my own agenda  i mean i have my own agenda and interest  that i'm not trying to  valorize with evolutionary psychology uh  you know most people in the 21st century  they want to spend time with others who  you know who understand who people who  understand who i really am you know  people who appreciate intellectually the  same things i appreciate ethically  appreciate the same things that you know  um  emotionally people who have a really  profound level of  emotional compatibility with you well  you know i i that's that's way beyond  the point of of mere survival that's way  beyond the point of merely counteracting  loneliness  or what i think is an evolved instinct  to to avoid  just dying of starvation or  her or abandonment you know i i think  you know at some point we have to write  this okay this is this is way beyond the  remit of what we're talking about with  evolutionary psychology but  why should i have dreams about someone  years after i've stopped talking to them  and years after i consciously and  intellectually decided i don't want to  talk with them  i don't want to be your friend there's  one song it's a really short song by the  ramones  called i don't want to walk around with  you i remember talking with us a friend  of mine and  it's a very short  song it's very repetitious song the  entire lyrics of the songs are as  follows i don't want to walk around a  part of me i don't want to walk around  with you so why do you want to walk  around with me  and i remember i just thought that for  me that's like primary school you know  in the school like well you know you're  trying to be my friend i don't want to  be your friend  um why are we haunted by dreams of these  people that we may really think are  despicable but if even if it doesn't go  that far we're consciously  intellectually aware there's someone we  can never be friends with there's just  no compatibility there you know  intellectually ethically emotionally  you're not compatible as friends  um  i think there is a reason for this but  it's not a very good reason and it's a  reason we have to learn to overcome  that's why we're why we're doing this  video today why i'm leading you in this  discussion or in this we're in the set  of reflections  so okay i i'm not going to speak for  myself i'm not going to speak for  melissa now but i'm going to speak for  hypothetical members of the audience you  guys can tell me not too many comments  just the last couple minutes i'm sure  this is a slightly horrifying  conversation for many of you it is i  mean it's disturbing to think about  but you know  do any of you ever find do any of you  ever find that you have wistful moments  of reflection  in which  you yearn for the friendship  of people you knew in primary school or  people you knew in high school people  you knew in university  that you you you maybe look back at your  life and regret and think oh things  could be better now  if i had maintained this friendship if  i'd maintain this switch will you you  look back and  feel that something is missing feel that  something is lost because these people  aren't in your life today or that they  haven't been your life continuously for  all these years  and you know maybe in that moment you  just think you lost touch  that you know you didn't put the effort  in  do you ever feel that way and i so i  would suggest you maybe first thing in  the morning maybe when you've just woken  up and you're still a little bit half  asleep or something you know you're not  at your brightest you don't have your  rational mindset on to tackle the  problems that you have a wistful moment  of you know not just thinking whatever  happened to that person not just  curiosity but feeling that there's  something missing and something lost in  your in your life because you're not  still friends with those people  and then  you go on facebook  and you look at their profile  and now you're looking at the cold  clinical reality of who this person is  and the life they're living  and  you know they very likely they're not  going to show photographs they consider  embarrassing they're going to show  photographs that they uh  you know they feel proud of they feel  show them that they're at their best  photographs of themselves on vacation  photographs of themselves holding up a  bottle of champagne to celebrate  something photographs themselves with  face paint on  and a colored jersey  standing next to a truck  celebrating that  a certain team won the football game or  the baseball game you know  uh you you see you like my point being  they're they're showing you what they're  proud of they're showing you what they  enjoy whether that's a skiing vacation  or organized sports or getting drunk or  getting high  i've seen so many  profiles on the internet whether we're  talking about facebook or instagram or  tinder or what have you where the person  is  depicting themselves it's a  self-portrait they're holding marijuana  in one hand they have some kind of video  game in the other hand they have plastic  figurines in the background for the  different types of movies and tv shows  they they watch maybe posters for the  some of the movies they're into and like  it's like hey  here's here's the stuff i own that  represents what my life is all about  this one you know very often you're  looking at you know consciously  articulated autobiographical statements  in the form of a photograph whether  that's facebook instagram dating website  like like tin near you  whoa this is who this person is this is  who they become and this is this is who  they want me  to know them as like you know maybe in  reality i mean looks they're not putting  up a picture themselves vomiting in the  toilet maybe they're actually an  alcoholic and they they vomit in the  toilet on a regular basis that reason  they're not showing themselves at their  worst this is them showing themselves  and then you look at that  and you're struck with the contrast  between this half dream  half instinct yearning that they should  still be a part of your life you should  still be friends  and  you know the subtly horrifying reality  that you guys are alienated from one  another for  reasons for good reasons now you may  look back on any one of these particular  friendships some someone you know in  high school somebody new university  would say you may look back on a  particular friendship and think  you wanted to be friends you wanted to  continue the friendship but they  rejected you and there would be another  case we look at it you think oh well  really we should have been friends but i  rejected them  regardless  i think there's a kind of objectively  real sense  in which you can look at all of these  failed friendships all of these people  who disappeared from your life all these  people who could have been  part of your tribe  and who are not you know maybe they  briefly were a part of your tribe  whether it was when you were 16 or when  you were 21 you had some here to and now  and then you're not now you're strange  one another you know whether you feel  that you've rejected them or that they  rejected you  or that you just drifted apart that  nobody made the effort to maintain the  friendship but there was no particular  rejection nevertheless  even just looking at their facebook  profile  you will feel the chill of recognition  that this is someone you never could  have been friends with this is someone  you never could have got along with  that actually your natural enemies not  natural allies right  but you have this innate  instinct still  some of you guys may not feel that way  there's some biological diversity  amongst us you know some people some  people have much stronger social  instincts some people have very strong  anti-social instincts and some people  are autistic i have some autistic  members in my audience some of them  write to me appreciatively like i've had  autistic people write to me saying they  agree with my analysis of autism i'm not  autistic but i have made some videos  talking about i can't say this is a  universal pattern of thinking or feeling  i think it's even more important because  i've never heard anyone talk about it  nobody not my parents like not my other  girlfriends or whatever like you know  girlfriends prior to the girl i'm  currently with you know i i can't  remember  any tv show any youtube camera anyone  really  talking about that and i will go further  to state  this is not quite the same as loneliness  because i think you can wake up with  these feelings i think you can have  these feelings unguarded moments you can  sense this instinct  even when your life is full of other  people even when you are busily  socializing with and are integrated with  other people you can still feel it you  can still feel the sense that you should  reach out to and should still be in  touch with uh that you should still be a  tribe with these people even though  right now you have enough friends you  have a wonderful boyfriend or girlfriend  or you have two or three boyfriends or  girlfriends uh  what have you  so i'm going to take a moment now to  read uh  read comments in the audience  so lazolapoli says sorry  lazal lappy  yes to read the name correctly uh says  quote i had a dream of my teenage best  friend just last night and i do dream of  her often but i follow her on instagram  and i know our friendship is better off  dead to which he adds ahaha  yeah  and  look  raw intelligence  is a factor  i am of the opinion that most people are  stupid because they choose to lead a  stupid life  like their potential to build themselves  up intellectually whether that's in  their teenage years their 20s their 30s  their 40s in any given  decade of their life that they're  dissipating and wasting their potential  to make themselves into a more  substantive person intellectually so  like i see stupidity as a process  and as a product of a pro of an ongoing  process  more than i see it as an innate trait  however you know some people are born  severely mentally disabled sometimes  you're looking at an innate trait a  characteristic that prevents you from  from developing intellectually  but you know um  if you just think about the mass of  people you knew in high school like who  you knew at all  you had a single conversation with you  think about the mass of people you knew  in university  the vast majority of them are just too  stupid for you to be interested in  having a friendship with them today  and many of them many of them are too  crazy  for you to be interested in having a  friendship with them today  now  beyond that  if you think so you know this huge  survey of people you remember and half  remember  if you think about the few exceptions  really intelligent people who happen to  be in your high school or happen to be  in your university  um  i think if you just try to separate  those couples you never had friendships  with them or you didn't maintain a  friendship with them  and then you think about who they are  and their values  like i knew a couple of very smart guys  who went into  computer programming  i don't miss them you know i i don't  look back on that with any regret i  can't look back now and say like you  know they were like in some sense they  were some of the smartest people i ever  met in high school university but i  don't respect what they've done with  their lives i'm not interested in this  and you know they they don't know about  history and politics and the things i  care about they're not going to have a  conversation with me about the things i  care about and you know probably vice  versa is drew probably they would not  want to sit down and have a conversation  with me about buddhism  or you know politics or the history of  the american constitution or whatever it  is i'm researching or or care about at  the time  and  you know looks i mean that's that's one  type of person you know i knew people  who went to the theater  oh  but you know again where i just do not  have anything anything in common that  way but sure you know i know  intelligence it makes it so  uncomfortable to kind of quantify  intelligence but even if you're just  looking at a dating app even if you're  looking at tinder or one of these dating  apps  of course you're quantifying  intelligence all the time and you may be  doing it very imperfectly and you would  be doing it inaccurately someone who has  a photograph of themselves holding a jug  of beer and laughing and screaming  they might actually be a very  intelligent person but you're looking at  that image you're judging them you're  looking at their tattoos and judging  them you know so  yeah  um and again i don't think this side of  the game can be referred to  um  evolutionary psychology i don't think we  can rationalize these choices we make  because probably all were evolved to do  is to try to create a tribe of people  that we can trust enough to gather  firewood together and even you know you  leave one person to tend the fire okay  you keep the fire going it's very hard  to light a fire in terms of evolutionary  time in terms of prehistory over the  last several thousand years okay you  have to keep the fire going well we go  and do this other chore do this other  task or we bring the food or something  just people you can work with on that  level is what i think we uh  what i think we instinctually desire and  what we're terrified of of lacking you  know  um you guys may know  um so anyway so look great it's a great  question eamon flame here asks do people  have to be intelligent to be your friend  a question mark what if someone is just  nice why can't they be your friend  go back on my channel and look up the  debate i did with  uh modvegan so obviously that's her  youtube name not her not her government  name or what have you i don't know if i  can even remember her real first name  at this point anyway um  you know when i returned to canada  um  it was completely reasonable for me to  expect that mod vegan was going to be  one of my few friends here in canada you  can list off  all the things we have in common  uh oh yes so  melora remembers margaret was her first  name i i had forgotten actually  genuinely i forgot her first day it's  been a long time as a doctor  it's been like  maybe four years three and a half years  anyway um  that's a link to just a video  i did with her  so anyway you can make a list of things  i have in common with her like veganism  you know uh she's also a parent i think  she and i are about the same age also  she's in an age gap relationship the  same as i think her husband is 14 years  older than her  my girlfriend and  presumed second wife is 14 years younger  than me and so we have a whole lot of  things in in common you know  she's not my friend she's never gonna be  my friend  um  and you know  sure  she's you know think about intelligence  think about  ethics  think about emotional character it's  kind of those three  categories the intellectual the ethical  the emotional uh we're not compatible  but you know if we were actually on a  desert island  a great idiom especially as vegans of  course she's someone i could trust to  chop lumber you know i mean she's  someone i could live with and cooperate  with on that on that level but what  we're into uh you know obviously she  also thought what i had to say about  drug addiction was morally despicable so  i have a i have a more recent video that  also talks about that i mean she she  considered me morally despicable  basically because i want cocaine and  heroin to be illegal  yeah that's i have a very mainstream  view of that in many ways you could say  i have a conservative view but i don't  have the extreme left-wing view so you  know that that illustrates the gap  between us but you know so if you're at  the question you ask is does someone  have to be intelligent to be your friend  the answer is yes  you know and  you know i think if someone were my  friend for more than just a few days you  know no it wouldn't work if they aren't  at a very high level in all three of  those categories uh intellectual  character ethical character and  emotional character yeah i was just  gonna say even in the realm of  evolutionary psychology  stupidity is dangerous and if you have  injury and you need somebody to gather  food you know so that you don't starve  to death while you're injured  it does matter to have  sheer intelligence on that mobilizing so  i know you you've made this contrast  between like what is evolutionarily a  factor in in who we  um  who we want to be around who will be a  member of our plan  um  but i think there's also  something  today we really care about the ethical  intellectual qualities of people i think  it does kind of relate because if  somebody is really stupid it's dangerous  to be around them yes  sure um you know if somebody's watching  the fire you want them to  not catch other things on fire not catch  the  blinds  i just think you have to admit that's a  much lower bar than we actually impose  on our  on our friends  you know that we and and look guys if  we're being all the way honest  women  have much higher demands of their  friends  than of the men they fall in love with  i mean women are so demanding of their  other female friends she has to agree  with you on everything you know  politically ethically like but she can  like a woman can be a teetotaler  teetotaler is a fancy word for she  drinks no alcohol at all no alcohol no  drugs and she can fall in love with a  guy who drinks beer every friday and  saturday she's like oh well i love him  he'll be okay he's coming around i can  help him like she'll make every [ __ ]  excuse in the world for the guy who's  dick she's sucking but like her best  friend since high school it's like that  [ __ ] is trying to destroy me you know  like you know like  some woman who's been your best friend  since high school she's drinking beer on  the weekend and you judge her and you  hate her and you can't trust her like as  a as a pattern a lot of people  the exacting standards and requirements  they apply to their friends are much  higher than their lovers precisely  because love itself  romantic love the erotic impulse  motivates you to make excuses for  those people  now i i look i do think i mean the  stereotype that men are better at making  friends in maintaining friendships i  think there is some truth to that  uh  some  go on what you can say about drug dealer  example yeah  right  right  [Music]  look there are look as you said use of  some very stereotypical male roles  there are men who have friends they knew  from the army and they go bowling  together and they know they're dumb  and they know they have ptsd and stuff  like oh yeah you know brad i was you  know somebody they were on  assignment with in afghanistan so no i  think i think people do accept  stupid like i'm not saying you should  you know but but i think i think you're  going you're taking the evolutionary  psychology german in precisely the way i  warned you not to no because you see how  easy it is though i think it's a good  example she has totally good intentions  but it's easy to slip into a kind of  self-justifying mentality where like oh  well like you personally you have a bias  you have an agenda you want to justify  selecting more intelligent people to be  your friends and then you're trying to  attribute this to devolution but anyway  i think it's v it's very easy  people want to justify their own sex  lives there are men who sleep with  prostitutes who will give you a cold  calculating justification that paying  for sex with prostitutes is justified by  evolutionary psychology and again there  are people who live in celibacy and just  marry one person and have no sex out of  marriage and they justify that in terms  of evolution  i've had hate mail from those people i  think they're  incredibly stupid  so guys by the way if you have a moment  hit the thumbs up button it'll help more  people discover the video and if you  actually know someone who'd benefit from  joining this conversation if you have a  friend you hate and never want to talk  to again  can send the link to this uh  this discussion about about the nature  of friendships and the the implications  of these things  someone can send this link to margaret  hey isil just said you're a piece of  [ __ ] margaret you guys can never be  friends but it's true you know look i i  i obviously on some level  i regret losing margaret as a friend  on another level i just know  it's it's not possible for us to friend  so it's ridiculous regretting it you  know like i know it's going to sound  weird but it's just as absurd as  regretting that i am not friends with a  statue made of stone you know it's  really the alienation is that deep and  it's that profound there's no way i can  be friends with that person and if i i  don't do this i'm just being honest with  you i do not go to facebook and look  through the profiles of people i knew in  high school university i'm just honestly  i'm not a member of any groups where i  could do that like for some of you  that's easy because you're like you may  be members of a facebook group which is  specifically for people who went to high  school and graduated in the same year as  you or people who went to your college  for some of you it's one most like a way  to that i've i've never done that  um  but you know  yeah however there are specific people  where i've looked up youtube videos  they've made and this kind of thing  where i've found their web presence  they're intentionally created public uh  web presence and you have that sense of  coldness but i i think that is the same  thing as recognizing i could no more be  friends with this person than with the  statue made of still see i  to me the degree of mutual alienation is  is that real and the impossibility of  moving past it  or or moving uh beyond it  okay so atlanta richard asks andy i did  encourage this guy to to specify what  was you want me to talk about earlier he  says quote what about the way many of us  compartmentalize friends what is a real  or true friends when it's appropriate to  say sheer he used to be my friend so i'm  just going to be 100 honest to you  richard and  sadly some of these problems do come  down to semantics because other people  may not use the word friend in the same  way i do implicitly in everything i've  said up to this point in the video  i've treated friendship as something  totally separate from work  from employment i think that work  gives people a kind of false friendship  um  you can be a taxi driver  uh you can work in an office  and it's like okay  there's this person they're my co-worker  they're also employed by this company  and i am gonna trust them just to do  this task with me just to accomplish  this task and then it's we're done we're  done here i don't talk to you i don't  like you i don't trust you  i don't know your political opinions and  i don't care and those relationships can  go on for decades i mean you can know  someone for 10 years at work in what you  call like a compartmentalized way and  then some people blend business with  pleasure like this is someone you know  from work but you invited them to your  wedding you know whatever it is you know  i get it this is someone from work but  sometimes you go and drink alcohol  together uh i i don't think that's evil  but i think that a lot of people have a  kind of false friendship in their life  that is produced by the workplace  and if they even just stop and think  about it for a minute they'll be able to  recognize well a work a work colleague  is not a friend um now of course of  course by the way someone you met at  work could become your friend i'm not  i'm not saying that's that's impossible  nor there's even any barrier to that  but when you talk about a  compartmentalized friendship that's what  i think of as a totally false friendship  in that sense because it's someone who  you can work with on a particular task  someone you can trust and appreciate  only in relation to  accomplishing that that task so by the  way i um copied and pasted a comment  from  look it's  one of my long-term um supporters so if  you scroll up slightly you should see  this le kiss wrote in and said quote  in his opinion in europe most cultural  activities like poetry and theater are  heavily state financed i.e you have to  know which bureaucrat gives out grant  money and how the process works i grew  up in toronto and look the best word we  have for this in english is nepotism  uh  in literally nepotism means that you  rely on blood relations aunts and uncles  and grandparents but we also use it more  broadly to mean personal connections  the arts in canada and toronto they were  nepotistic to an unbelievable stand  people using friends and connections so  you say bureaucrats it's not always  bureaucrats but  it is people who know people  and yes that does include filling out  application forms  to get grant money from the oh god and  but even renting the space just renting  the theater where the performance is  going to happen yeah it's horrifying and  that explains why so so many of the  things put on stage are terrible and  have no audience uh there's there's all  this awful awful live theater and you  can't believe anyone ever made the  effort to put it on  um  [Music]  growing up in the context i grew up in i  i i'm not aware of a single example  where something positive came out of  that kind of nepotism but yeah no this  is a massive massive factor you're  talking about so in anthropology it's a  much misused concept but there's also  the concept of the gift economy  it's it's very boring a marcel mouse and  the gift economy  um  now i've read the original hypothesis  the original essay or book chapter this  comes from actually it was a short book  it was an essay published as a book it's  just a very very short book  um  you know so  the gift economy is a flattering term  for uh bribery what can i tell you  but you know there are whole parts of  the economy and yes in europe in toronto  in montreal  um  your ability to accomplish things in  theater  it can rely totally on a gift economy  and it's sickening so the fact that you  like you maybe didn't pay a bribe but  the fact that you invited someone to  stay at your cottage during the summer  to go on vacation with you and you you  know that there's a kind of exchange of  gifts that very often cements favors  that are done for other people and also  to a massive extent uh drugs and  prostitution are involved and i'm sorry  but if we're being all the way real  people do cocaine together and people  sleep with prostitutes together and  people make arrangements to provide one  another with prostitutes actually i just  read the autobiography of a guy and he  described using that in hollywood he got  ahead very much like to give an example  um  i'm not someone who's into hollywood  actors but anyway there was a famous  hollywood actor an oscar award-winning  hollywood actor and one of the ways he  got this guy on his side and got him to  do favors for him which led to him being  able to do different film projects was  simply that he he hired  he described her as an incredibly  gorgeous chinese  prostitute a frosty who had been working  as a las vegas dancing girl this is a  high-end prostitute from las vegas who  also did dancing and  he just had her sit in his car  as he pulled up to this guy's office  window and tried to arrange him  and then the the actor went for it i  mean he the uh this woman actually moved  into the actor's apartment for a couple  of weeks or something and this was  really this is really bribery of this  kind so again whether it's  drugs or sex i mean very often it's  something much uglier or i shouldn't  even say i shouldn't say uglier i mean  let's let's not be so judgmental here  but it's um  it's something that has more serious  consequences than the mere exchange of  gifts yeah so anyway but look so we've  dealt with false friendship and now  we're getting into the false economy and  how there is a kind of false economy  connected to cultural production those  are all those are all real issues  however this is this is basically  extending out far beyond um the central  the central topic of this of this video  but i think also these are kind of the  shadows  in between which  real friendship exists so it's worth  talking about this is very much the  cultural and psychological  context in the midst of which we've got  to talk about friendship  if it is something real at all and look  guys i want to say this too  the fact that you yearn for something  doesn't make it real the fact that you  desire something uh doesn't make it real  i read an anthropological paper once and  i only read this because my ex-wife  printed it out handed to me and she even  told me the amusing parts you know i  mean she was like oh yeah i've afraid of  she circled it or just told me what  pages i told my ruth uh i read an  anthropological paper that was dealing  with  polyamory  uh polyamory open relationships this  kind of thing and it also dealt with  bisexuality within polyamorous  anthropology of these these issues and  these questions and one of the men  interviewed for this  he said i think i think passionately but  irrationally he said you know have you  ever seen  a group of kittens rolling around on a  carpet  he said that's what he wants human  nature to be like you have a group of  kittens that are all rolling around on  the carpet and joining us he said why  can't human sexuality be like that why  can't we have a group of people instead  of just two people who love each other  why can't we have a whole group of  people who love each other and all  roll around together ah  the kittens you're talking about  those would be brothers and sisters who  are newborns who are still literally  surviving by drinking breast milk from  their mother right  you know like it's such a deeply by the  way the article didn't say any of that  the article didn't criticize it it just  reported what he said so you know  but still as as misguided and insane as  that may be  i understand what it is he yearns for he  yearns for he wants a sense of community  togetherness  he wants to be able to roll around with  a whole bunch of people who trust and  love and appreciate each other not to  have isolated jealous monogamous  relationships so you know i get it like  in some ways you could say it's a  beautiful dream  right but the fact that you want it  doesn't make it real and wanting it more  won't make it more real maybe you want  something that's totally impossible and  like the fact that we have this fear of  being alone built into us  um which by the way i haven't been  talking about myself i think if anything  i'm i'm a very unusual person  i i have complete mastery over that  feeling or i feel it much less than  other people perhaps and i could talk  about that but it's not my own personal  weakness you know many many years of my  life i've been totally alone i've been  totally alone in countries and places  where nobody speaks the same language as  me or i can't even communicate you know  the communication you can have is just  buying groceries like really you know  how well did i speak lotion when i was  living alone in laos you know these  these kinds of scenarios  um where i've been able to embrace and  thrive on uh isolation for significant  parts of my life um  you know uh  so so this isn't really talking about my  own psychology uh very much but the fact  that people are afraid of being alone  the fact that they want to have friends  and friendship that doesn't mean they  can and it doesn't mean it's something  real  um  and even if it is something ideal  doesn't mean it's something  something attainable something viable  for uh for any of us as individuals or  for the great bulk of humanity because  in the same way that i described before  looking at those facebook profiles and  thinking whoa i don't want to have  anything to do with this person you know  okay well don't you think the other  people who went to high school they feel  that way about me like when they look at  my  youtube channel or they look at my  instagram do you think any of the people  i went to high school with look at that  and think oh wow great he's reading  thucydides he's reading aristotle he's  reading  what we put most recently uh plutarch's  lives i put up on my instagram now some  some do uh the girl i lost my virginity  with she got in touch with me and she  she got a phd and  i i won't specify too much in an area of  classics she still had some things in  common with me she's gone on and gotten  married and has kids of our own and  stuff once in a while there are people  who knew me in high school who get  touched me and still they respond  positively to what my public image is  and what i'm doing with my with my  dealership but the vast majority of  people right that rejection is going to  be mutual and if you think sorry it's a  brief digression but it may be an  important one for some of you if you  think  that being involved with mainstream  cultural crap means you won't be alone  you're wrong  most of the people who watch anime  are alone they're lonely and they hate  their lives they don't have the friends  they want neither quantitatively nor  qualitatively the p the vast majority of  people who drink beer and watch football  are alone are lonely are unhappy and  just this way they don't have the  quantity or or quality of friends they  want so there are people who are total  conformists from the day they're they're  born to the day they they die and they  don't have the kind of friendships that  i have in my life even if i can say my  friends my are too few and that my  friendships are too shallow that i wish  i had more more friends quantitatively  and also that there was more friendship  in each relationship you know  qualitatively  sorry i'm just going to be comments  melissa if you if you want to comment  too you also count as part of this  melissa never comments in text form but  she gets to she gets to speak whenever  she wants to be  so yeah ronald sims says quote ron is a  long-time viewer of the channel by the  way i feel i know him fairly well at  this point ron says quote i'm choosy  when it comes to friends watching this  is making it making me feel even more  steadfast in my stance close quote  yeah and you know  it's easy to forget just how awful it is  to sit and listen to someone or sit and  console someone sit and comfort someone  when you really don't like them and  really don't respect them and really  don't want to be their friend you know  um if  some of you have been in that situation  this week you know what i mean but you  know have you ever held someone's hand  when they're telling you about how they  cheated on their boyfriend  or you know whatever it is so something  something you personally don't  sympathize with and don't like this  person you're like why am i sitting here  um  you know someone who you're expected to  be friends with but actually you despise  them for some of you maybe you've been  in that situation more often with  relatives because you're expected to be  friendly with your cousin or your  brother or sister or something and  you're like  look you you have all these assumptions  about me and how much you haven't come  but really  you know you don't want to be with them  so that's one thing but of course also  when you're friends with someone as  we've been discussing mostly indirectly  you are making yourself vulnerable and  they can rob you and you know they can  they can backstab you and hurt you but  you know they can all just literally  steal things from you  um  you know you're you're opening yourself  up to a lot of really negative  experiences  um  which again some of you will have had  where you tried to be friends with  someone and they stole your  bike um  it can be as simple as that so but again  for many of us if it's been many years  if it's if you haven't had that kind of  experience for years and years you may  have forgotten that but yes there are  there are elements of risk uh in  friendship friendships have friendships  with negative people have uh have  negative consequences  and you know if you have friends who are  drug addicts yes in an indirect sense  you can talk about the fear that you end  up becoming a drug addict yourself or  you end up becoming implicated in their  crimes like the police are questioning  you because your friends have been  committing crimes  that's one kind of fear  but also do you actually want to sit  there and hold their hand and comfort  them when they're dealing with drug  addict [ __ ] like do you really love them  or appreciate them or  you know respect them enough to do that  or are you sitting there thinking look  to me you're just a despicable person  um you guys might not remember 50 cent  made an autobiographical movie about his  life and it's a very brief scene but he  has his girlfriend at the time just  revile him he's on painkillers he's on  prescription painkillers some kind of  opiate and she says to him look are you  gonna stop using these drugs because  when i look at you now i just see a weak  person  you know and he breaks down crying  you know but he does he quits the drugs  he quits using the painkillers you know  so you know um  you know it's it's a momentous turning  point in his life  in various ways you know this is harsh  because he actually was reverent from  injuries when he was on these these  painkillers but they made him mindless  whatever they you know he was  snowballed out of his brain on these on  these painkillers  so you know um  just how awful it is to pretend to be  friends with someone you're not friends  with you may have forgotten and that's  reciprocal it could be it could be awful  for someone else to hold your hand it  could be awful for someone else to uh  to comfort you in that way you know  so again look his comments quote maybe  this subject also somewhat ties into the  religion discussion i've done some long  videos recently talking about religion  and atheism um  quote having someone of the same faith  provides a community without actually  being close to these other people not  really being friends the other people  who are part of your faith group i would  refer that back to my concept of work  again there is a lot of work  in  religious communities where it's just  okay  we're gonna put up this tent you know  okay we're gonna organize these hot dogs  and this uh  you know barbecue grill  people do those things together and  again i think it gives them a type of  false friendship that is just the  product of work  um  and again i'm not saying it's evil  but it can certainly be misleading so i  would say the work of religion in that  sense gives people a semblance of  friendship um without actually giving  them friends and look again something  implicit in this this whole video i'm  very much opposed to  um  attitudes of entitlement you know i do  not feel entitled to have friends i do  not feel that um  my high school owes me  friends or people even potentially could  be my friends you know think about what  the high school principal what the high  school bureaucrats are trying to  accomplish think about the university uh  like i i know it may sound like an easy  thing to say nobody owes you any friends  but we're not raised that way  by television by movies and also by our  own parents most of us are taught that  we are entitled to friends that there's  some obligation of other people to be  friends with us and that we're obliged  to be friends with other people too many  people will tell you that the primary  purpose of high school and university is  to make these friends who will last the  rest of your lives but again if i look  at  sort of mentally i i think of the  facebook profiles of all the people i  went to high school with people went to  university with again i've never  actually done that but kind of in your  mind's eye you imagine this list of of  these things why would there even be a  single person who is of an intellectual  character that would merit my friendship  what are the odds that there would even  be one person who went to the same high  school university who intellectually  would be could be should be my friend  and then  ethically because someone could be quite  brilliant but they're evil  i've known people okay  and then  emotionally right what if someone it's  not intellectually they're good enough  for you  um  ethically they're good enough for you  but emotionally they're an [ __ ]  they're a terrible person they're a  terrible friend to you they can't share  your life emotionally  it is incredibly unlikely you'll you'll  have even a single friend that lasts the  rest of your life who happened to go to  the same high school university  now when you talk about the workplace  you're normally talking about a  relatively tiny number of people you  meet you might work with 10 other people  why would any of them be friends and  i've known i've known a few people but  well you struggle with that i kind of  don't want to give away home talking  here but i mean  i knew people who made sacrifices to  work in a very specialized field of  research like a  very specialized area of studies or of  kind of social work of political  outreach work or something and they were  expecting to meet wonderful people that  have a lot of a lot in common with  because these other people chose to  study in that area or who chose to try  to help people and change the world in  that area like more politically or in  terms of charity work and they get there  and  nobody's your friend nobody  you know you then deal with the great  coldness of middle age and that no you  know have fewer friends than you had  before in high school you have fewer  friends of the people in your field of  study or in your profession who you were  expecting have so much in common with  you'd say oh wow these these people my  colleagues i have less in common with  them than the random selection of people  i happen to go to high school with have  to go to university with um that's  that can be a horrifying thing and that  many of us have to then live with  for decades the rest of our lives you  know  so we have quite a number of intelligent  comments here  quote relationships in the modern age  are far more important  for personal connections of this kind  so what makes someone a real friend  comma i would say it is all about how  they make you feel close quote  well  i disagree  because you know the title of this video  is friendship  your mind is playing tricks on you  how you feel  your mind can really play tricks on you  for all the reasons i talked about in  the first hour  of this video and the fact that you feel  that you need a friend or you feel loved  or cared for you feel that you can trust  this person  feelings are  usually wrong  you know and they can prove to be wrong  with time with devastating effects for  you  uh  and and look most people are not  intellectuals  tana mongeau lives her life on the basis  of feelings she's someone who cares a  lot about friendship and doesn't matter  she talks about it a lot  um she's someone who has defined her  life in terms of the friends she gathers  around herself she's probably much  closer to being an ordinary person than  i am with the exception that she's  fabulously wealthy  so she doesn't have to worry about  earning money uh so on and so forth but  you know no i i don't think you can  uh judge friendship on how you feel and  i think on the contrary  your mind will play tricks on you  you know and sorry no offense but it's  quite possible in your own life your  mind is playing tricks on you much more  than you know  and again you you might anyway you don't  you don't necessarily know how you how  those people you call friends feel about  you  um and you don't know to what extent  your feelings  are  the shadow cast by your own needs your  own fears your own insecurities and as i  say your own your own instincts  you know  um  [Music]  okay so the same person comments quote  you can disagree in certain you can  disagree about certain moral and  intellectual issues yes but if they  truly make you feel comfortable and you  feel that you can be open with no  problem that's enough necessary  when i lived  in vien chen  the capital city of laos  there were a lot of older men with years  of work experience who were interesting  guys who had things they could teach me  and he wanted to be my friends  you know they wanted to sit around and  talk they wanted to drink beer and talk  to me but i don't drink alcohol  you know  um  [Music]  i was not willing to be friends with  them  because they slept with prostitutes  these were older white men  some of them british some of them  australian  some of them other ethnicities but these  were white europeans  and they're sleeping with teenage  asian prostitutes from thailand laos  cambodia this this guy this kind of  maybe some from vietnam  ethical  differences matter  you know  um now conversely  who were the people living in celibacy  who were the people living the kind of  resolute  sober self-discipline lifestyle  i lived myself they were christian  missionaries  i couldn't be friends with them  i did not feel i could be friends with  someone who was a protestant missionary  or a catholic missionary who had come to  this country to destroy  its indigenous cultures to convert  people to this religion that i consider  despicable however  in terms of how they actually live their  lives those were the only people who  were refusing  to sleep with prostitutes and also  generally drinking very little alcohol  or completely refusing to drink alcohol  right  so most of the people i could have been  friends with or could have been  colleagues with i reject it you know  now again  i mentioned this  more than an hour ago  it's difficult to be honest with  yourself about just how high  your demands are  of your friends  there is this example this particular  situation i was in  when i was still a very young man i just  finished my last year of university so  there's a couple a couple months after i  completed my last university courses  and  i was invited to give a lecture in front  of a live audience i forget there were  30 people in the audience but it was not  a big audience  and it wasn't that big a room in the  university we ran after the event i was  supposed to give a lecture about  history uh history and politics to  introduce a special speaker who had been  invited who was the author of a book  who's going to talk about the book  so i got up and i gave an unscripted you  know i had thought about what i was  going to say but given unscripted and  spontaneous  uh  lecture and the audience was completely  silent while speaking and they applauded  at the end you can imagine i'm kind of  good at talking  but during it at one moment  the silence was broken when my  girlfriend of that time a girlfriend i  was in a very high commitment loving  relationship with where i assumed we  were going to go on to get married and  so on and so forth it was a super high  commitment long-term relationship she  laughed she laughed at me  in a mocking way  during  the lecture  you know  um  now  what actually happened i was in the  lecture partly i'm speaking to introduce  the author  and i used the term i referred to the  book she had written as a seminal work  in the field which is standard  academic parlance  and my girlfriend was sitting next to  this  someone who was basically an  acquaintance of hers but who had been a  friend of mine and between the two of  them you know  whispering but you know you can kind of  hear that in a halt like that it's not  that big of a haul they whispered they  made a dick joke about the word seminal  you know seminal has more than one  meaning it's a seminal work some of her  and then she laughed at me in a mocking  way and you can hear that  and again i'm i'm still i'm a very  experienced self-confident public  speaker now i was a much younger man at  that time but to have someone you love  and you trust laugh at you in a mocking  way during the lecture  you know  um  i didn't get mad at her and you know i  didn't stop giving i didn't interrupt my  lecture i didn't get stage fright or  stop working at that time  uh but when it was over uh when it was  after the whole event was over not at  that moment when i finished everything  but you know this  heard the lecture from the woman i'd  introduced and so on you know when we  were outside on the sidewalk after i  said look  i'm breaking up with you this  relationship is over like i'm i never  want to speak to you again  and i said to her very simply look you  know  the joke the laugh you had at that  moment in the silence was given pleasure  if i had done that to you  how would you feel because i knew her  she was not a self-confident person like  me she wasn't a gifted public speaker i  say you would have broken down crying  and you would have been furious with me  you would be throwing a lamp at me or  something you'd be throwing dishes at me  you would be you know  she had a violent temper that girlfriend  did she had a lot of bad characters i  know  what kind of fury you would have toward  me if i had laughed at you that way you  know the same tone and everything  and you know no if you love me and you  support me and you're there you're  hearing me give this lecture to support  me it's not really that she's interested  in hearing the lecture if you're there  as my woman as my girl you know this is  totally unacceptable now she did beg and  plead and negotiate her way back into  having another chance at the  relationship but i've got to tell you  looking back now  i was completely right to want to dump  her  i wish i dumped her that day and never  spoke to her  just being 100 honest looking back at  what the rest of their relations was  like this is a momentary lapse it's a  moment  you know it shows bad judgment on her  character whatever but it tells you a  lot about her it tells you a lot about  what her attitude was toward me and that  she really had a kind of punitive and  mean attitude towards me i've dealt with  this with several several women who  really loved me and well she loved me  that girl and  um  she loved me and she had a like erotic  obsession with me she was very turned on  by me and so in terms of chemistry  but she also really wanted to hurt me  and really wanted to take me down a peg  and it came out all the time in  different ways this sense of her wanting  to have revenge against me  and her resenting that i was more  intelligent than her and her wanting to  somehow hurt me  this  major major thing in the relationship  and that moment really showed that now  look  um so this tells you a lot about my  intellectual character too i'm  incredibly demanding of my friends i'm  incredibly demanding of my lovers you  know i don't lower my standards for  anyone and by the way if you think i  lower my standards for my brothers or my  sisters  for my cousins or my singles no  no like i judge everyone equally and  it's like either you live up to my  standards or you don't and i'm i'm at  peace with that if you're not at peace  with that we shouldn't be friends you  know  but my point here is this i am never  going to attempt to vindicate  my values and what i'm just here  admitting to you explain to you i am  never going to try to vindicate that in  terms of evolutionary psychology  uh  if the survival of our species  depended on having such a high level of  intellectual compatibility such a high  level of emotional compatibility  such a high level of ethical  compatibility as as i demand from  everyone in my life right  the species couldn't possibly exist no  we're evolved to try to form deep  lasting cooperative bonds with people  that we trust enough to go and gather  firewood you know  okay you're on my side you're on my team  you're part of my tribe we're gonna get  firewood together  we're gonna store rice together  you're not gonna you're not gonna wait  till i'm asleep and then steal all the  rice out of the storage room and then  run away and start your own tribe you  know  and you know obviously relationships of  authority then creep into this how do we  form unequal societies together how do  we raise children together do i do i  trust you enough to let you babysit my  kid think about that level of trust you  know  so  you know now look so  i'm now bringing myself into the  equation more we're an hour and 30  minutes then but i haven't been talking  that much about me talking about  humanity in general and you know  uh been generalizing about a kind of  average person to a large extent i'm not  averse to being alone i think most  people are ruled by a very powerful fear  of being alone i remember one of my  brothers  talking to me about the fact that he  couldn't stand just to be alone in his  own apartment for two days and he had a  really terrible uh  throat infection he was really sick but  he still had to go out and get drunk at  a bar and hang around with people  because he he felt like he was being  honest with me he felt he could not go  for like 48 hours without spending time  with people now again maybe he's an  extreme example maybe not maybe he's  just more honest than other people that  for him to be alone in his apartment  when you're sick and he was alone he  didn't have a girlfriend or any other  time just not in general he wasn't gonna  have trouble with that but at that time  he didn't have a girlfriend living with  him he didn't have anyone else's  apartment to be alone in your apartment  for 48 hours or 72 hours you can't do  that well i am someone who is totally  happy to go on a long bicycle trip alone  from city to city across thailand laos  and cambodia and where am i going when i  get off my bicycle i'm going to a  library doing it was going to archives  and manuscriptoria you know collection  and go and sit alone and i go to museums  and i see stone inscriptions and to  study history and study politics and  study these things and  again even if i say hi to someone on my  way into the library which is often the  case i knew the person by the desk oh hi  but then that's it then you're alone  with the book i'm alone with like i've  lived a life for many many years many of  you guys i'm alone with the bicycle i'm  alone with the books when i'm at the gym  i'm alone at the gym even if there's  other people there they don't talk to me  i've been very comfortable living a life  totally alone including living a life  where i don't speak the same language as  anyone else like you know i can't really  communicate with people in  whatever the language spoken is in in  the country i've been i've been totally  totally comfortable with that and the  truth is  like the most alone i've ever been in my  life was probably here in canada both in  toronto and when i was attending class  at university of victoria i would go for  months where the only verbal interaction  i had with somebody i remember i made  fun of them as i said i started keeping  track of it was when they asked me  uh did i want to pay to have a bag with  that do i want a plastic bag with it at  the end or is depending on the grocery  store do you have a discount card for  the grocery that was it nobody talked to  me you know there was no interaction and  i was happy and i was thriving those  were positive times in my life you know  i'm someone who's really strong enough  to be alone and maybe that's why  i'm so comfortable rejecting other  people and telling them they don't live  up to my standards maybe other people  their fear of being alone motivates them  to maintain a friendship with someone  even though they drink alcohol and use  drugs and sleep with prostitutes again  these are just kind of  compromises i was not willing to make  and being honest with you like  this isn't hypothetical  you can put up together a hypothetical  thing like oh well okay here's this  wonderful guy  uh he's knowledgeable about these  subjects he can help you in different  ways someone with a lot of positive  redeeming traits however  he smokes marijuana drinks alcohol and  he sleeps with prostitutes two days a  week like two days a week he goes and  saves the prostitute you can think about  that in your mind's eye hypothetically  and think that's a friendship that can  work how do you feel when you're  actually sitting there face to face with  that guy and talking to him you know and  i can do the opposite you can talk about  someone who's a brilliant scholar who's  very knowledgeable and experiencing  those wonderful things but  they are a missionary working for the  vatican working for the catholic church  and this is who they are and this is  what they do you can construe a  hypothetical scenario we're like i could  be friends with that person how do you  feel when you're actually sitting there  talking to them you know so  yeah  and again you might feel differently at  a different age maybe when you're 50  years old you could make some of those  compromises maybe when you're 25 years  old you can't you know there's different  different dimensions to that but yeah  probably my own lack of fear  of being alone or just my own very high  level of positive motivation so at the  beginning this video we talked about  you can't learn tennis alone kind of  thing who what friends you have well i'm  someone who did a lot of things totally  alone with no teacher and no friends to  help me so on and so forth  including studying languages including  going out you know really changing my  life in in dramatic ways so if anything  i i i would not say i am an exception to  the rule i'm not saying what we're  talking about here in this conversation  doesn't  affect me in any way  but  i'm maybe an unusually detached observer  of this  because it's been less of an obstruction  and less of a limitation in my life than  it was  than what than it is for for others  is reading through your comments here  okay so we uh we have a comment from  himr edits so i'm glad to see i'm  building up people from the himr  [Laughter]  fan slash critic community i don't know  if anyone can be said to be a fan of  himr but this is probably someone who is  a critic of hmr  us in the audience but yeah i'd like to  think i'm the number one himr commentary  channel at the moment you know um okay  so natasha says quote  extreme extroverts are odd i am the  opposite tend to panic if i can't get uh  time alone throughout the day  well  um  [Music]  natasha  how would you live your life  if you thought the world was gonna end  if you can't organize a group of  political activists to carry out  this set of reforms this set of new  policy initiatives you believe in  what if you in this sense  believed in  global warming  you know  now i'll give you a less  uh  maudlin example a less emotionally  extreme example  i don't even know how much money melissa  spent on tuition in her whole life like  you know first like  how much money in total did your parents  have to spend for you to go to  university but it is many tens of  thousands of dollars okay if you live  anywhere in the united states of america  you know all these people who went into  debt or their parents saved up money  their whole lives it's this huge issue  to spend tens of thousands of dollars or  hundreds of thousands of dollars to get  a university education and that  education may have been very poor it may  have been worth much less than they they  paid for it it's a massive  social problem  um and it may be something that impacts  your own life directly and indirectly  okay  it's not the end of the world okay that  can go on forever that problem can get  worse and worse the university can be  overpriced and if you can do more  overpriced unless or until somebody gets  organized somebody stands up to do  something about it somebody stands up to  in a profound and sweeping way reform  and change  education forever  okay  how antisocial are you now  you know  what if you want to have friends  so that you  can change the world  like education policy like tuition  i mean who depending on who you are and  what problems you have contact with how  about prison reform you're living in a  country where you know the prisons are  corrupt and terrible places how about  taking care of orphans  there are pressing issues where you know  in your country or in your city orphans  are in a terrible situation and every  year matters every month matters for  these orphans or these prisoners or  these people going into debt for their  university education okay i think you  can get introverted quick  if you care  and again coming back to the major late  motif for this video  it's hard to care if you don't already  have friends who care if you don't know  five other people who say to you yeah  that's a big deal  somebody's gotta stand up and change it  and  if not you then who like i guess  somebody is gonna be you and me and us  right if you don't have people who share  your intellectual character  your emotional character your ethical  character who say yes somebody has got  to stand up and do something for these  orphans for these people in prison for  these university students  um  you are very unlikely to do it alone  right but of course conversely it could  start with you you could be the first  person to stand up and then you could  find your friends because you get  motivated so  you guys already know i've made videos  attacking the concept of of being an  introvert  um  so i don't need to just search for the  word introvert on my channel i think  there's even a playlist  for that topic and and you'll see what i  have to say on that  but  you know  when i was a scholar of buddhism  was i an extrovert when i was appalled  to humanitarian work was i an extrovert  when i was studying korean ojibwe at a  special university called first nations  university was i being an extrovert i  was trying to get things done i was  trying to change the world and you can't  do it alone you can't  i mean what is the difference between me  and kevin smith as a filmmaker  why haven't i made my first film yet  it's because of you natasha  it's because you are not friends with me  you know five people from this audience  natasha  joel  uh  hmir edits  you know like the five people in this  audience who just commented most  recently  you guys probably have enough talent and  enough of a skill set to work with me  and make a film that is better than  kevin smith's first film clerks the fact  that it's better doesn't mean it'll be  successful we can make a film that's  better and you know it only reaches a  few thousand people on on youtube or  whatever you know  but i just say you know like including  and working with other people and the  level of extraversion that's involved  there you guys don't have to talk to me  about your sex lives you know you don't  you can make a film together without  that kind of trust or what have you  um  but most people do like most i'm just  i'm not joking but most people in the  theater most people who work on films  they sit around and talk about their sex  lives they do i think you know i think  it's the same in the army i think people  are even more intimate and trusting when  they have that you know so-called esprit  de corps they talk about who they are  and what they care about and their own  heartbreak in the past or what's going  on with them i think people get to know  each other intimately and form exactly  that kind of uh friendship on a film set  you hear about it directly and  indirectly and in all these in all these  ways  so yeah and and look um  again sorry just  you know to be to be fair to everyone  involved um  you know when i look at other people's  tinder profile or i look at other  people's facebook profile or i look at  other people's  instagram  all the time i think i don't want to  know this person i don't want to be  friends with this person  all the time of course  and of course and i completely other  people will look at my instagram profile  or my and they'll feel that way about me  and that's great  this video is really talking about the  social instincts we're not so much  talking about the antisocial instincts  but obviously they're reciprocal and you  know the fact that you're attracted to  one person or the fact that you i sorry  i don't actually mean sexual attraction  here but the fact that you want to be  friends with one person necessarily  entails that you'll be repulsed by that  you'll be that you'll be rejecting  others  so someone else says here uh this is  lekis again quote i wouldn't have made  it through university  without colleagues explaining things to  me and calling my [ __ ]  when i thought i understood something  but really different  yeah  close quote  yeah  okay so anyway sorry so you guys say  it's totally fine two two people in the  audience agreeing with each other  someone says isil you are an extroverted  thinker for sure and natasha says uh  quote i think he is as well  um  i'm extroverted because i am a dissident  intellectual it's because i want to  change the world  um  [Music]  you know i'm i'm i really don't need  friends and that's i really don't  emotionally and i don't need people to  respect me if i don't respect them and  so on it's a huge thing in my life and  you know i know it's going to sound  weird but again you guys don't know that  side of my life but i i for years my  life consisted of going and looking at  manuscripts and stone inscriptions and  studying books you know just long hours  with books and what kind of then writing  where before youtube i thought of myself  as a writer i was writing and reading  and editing other people's writing i had  a life of paper and uh  you know i would go to the national  archives every [ __ ] city i went to i  remember laughing about this with a  friend of mine  the first place i went in bangkok  thailand the first day i was in bangkok  thailand i went to the national archives  which is a giant library that's what  it's the first place i went you know  that was the kind of man i was that was  how i lived so these things most people  would stereotype them as being  introverted you know as being you know  whatever a nerd-like  character now you guys can guess i never  was a nerd i was a very self-confident  very masculine very imposing figure  everywhere i went  um  but you know  so why why am i out meeting people and  talking to people and being social  people and learning from people it's  because i'm trying to work with people  it's because i'm trying to change the  world you know i'm not  reading those books in the library you  know it's not for the good of the book  that i'm reading it you know  uh  you know i i'm profoundly unhappy with  the status quo in all the societies i'm  living in i i want the future to be  different from the past and better than  the past in a number of of profound ways  you know i'm sorry when i was involved  with first nations  language research politics you know i do  not want the cree and ojibwe to go back  to living the way they were living 500  years ago right i'm someone who wants  something new and different and better  in the future for them better than what  they have now but also better than their  own ancient past you know shall we say  i'm not a backward looking researcher or  what have you but the things the the  type of work that denominated in my life  even at the beginning of this youtube  channel think about how many hours i  spent practicing the chinese language  just sitting i was also researching and  writing essays for several years of  channel those essays many of them are on  the internet you can read them so you  know i just say like it's the fact that  you see me doing a live stream  maybe gives you an impression of me as  being  extremely extroverted i'm not i'm not  offended by that but no i mean um  this isn't just some trait i have  this is a  tool i hold in my hands this is  something i'm doing intentionally this  is a means to an end  um  yeah so javier is commenting that being  alone with a two-year-old and a  seven-year-old is a very different  experience  yes  and this is actually one of the reasons  why i don't want to have two children of  of different ages you know giving a  two-year-old all of your attention  is very different from trying to  communicate with a seven-year-old at a  seven-year-old's level and a  two-year-old at a two-year-old's level  simultaneously but you guys know i have  experience taking care of children and  raising children and of trying to make  things meaningful and engaging for for a  child and i very much enjoy putting my  putting marriage to that but yeah  there's definitely a sense in which you  are never alone uh if you're raising  children and  virtually all of the time and energy you  have uh goes into that that kind of  relationship yeah but  parenting is not the topic of this video  okay so i'm gonna i'm gonna  wrap it up guys um  i think most people are not comfortable  admitting the extent to which we live  our lives in the shadow of these  instincts we are haunted  by these instincts we are much more  comfortable talking about  erotic instincts talking about sexual  desire talking about marriage or even  talking about cheating on your wife  cheating on your husband people are very  comfortable talking about that if you  look around youtube  to talk about  loneliness to talk about feeling alone  when you're not alone  feeling the need for friends  feeling that you need to be friends with  people  where on an intellectual level you're  aware you really can't be friends with  them or that you shouldn't be friends  with them but you still  yearn for desire that having the  friendships you made in youth in  childhood in your teenage years having  those friendships still haunt you in  your dreams  um  having a sense that the person you could  be or should be  relies on the friends you have you know  that you could have lived a better life  you could have accomplished something  more if only you'd held on to those  those connections and you know some we  haven't talked about feeling a sense  that your your self-worth  is rooted in the friend group you have  that it's that's perhaps limited by the  friends you have but it's also perhaps  elevated by the friends you have  there's a lot of that in human nature a  lot you know there are people who grow  up involved in organized crime because  they all their friends are involved with  organized crime and they feel that's who  they are that's all they're ever going  to be and there are people who are  relentless social climbers they're born  poor but they only want to have friends  who are wealthy i mean plays out these  are very coarse and crude examples but  there are people who put together their  their friend group precisely because  they feel that this does in some sense  elevate them or enable them or it  changes how they feel about themselves  when they look in the mirror who they  think they are how they think of  themselves changes with their with their  friend group and maybe it's not even a  group maybe it changes with one friend  you know maybe that's that's how you you  value friendship so yeah i think this is  an area that people are very reluctant  to analyze in part just because it  reveals the weakness of your own ego  and maybe also because  it's an inquiry that can never come to a  conclusion  when you're inquiring into and  reflecting on your own sexuality  there normally is some kind of  conclusive end to the story you know so  you had years of questioning your  sexuality and sleeping around and maybe  polyamory and open relationships or  maybe  cheating on your boyfriend  and then you came to a conclusion  you settled down you got married you  found the person who's the right person  for you or you dogmatically assert this  is the right person for you and you're  happily ever after someone else  they go through some confusion some  inquiry some questioning and then they  conclude they want to be alone forever i  know one person like that someone who  said no marriage and friendship sorry  marriage and any kind of commitment  religion that's just not for her she's  gonna be alone for the rest of her life  or you go through whatever whatever you  were confused about your sexuality and  then you finally figure out you're gay  and you  have a gay marriage or whatever it is  you settle there and find the person you  know  but where there is there's kind of a  beginning a middle and an end to the  story about your sexuality whether that  ending is a comedy or a tragedy you know  however bad it is that it comes to an  end and this  question of  friendship um  [Music]  you know it never ends  again i think this is probably  reciprocal with the other thing i  mentioned when people settle down  they normally settle for less you know i  was joking about this earlier where  women and men also they come to the okay  this guy has some things wrong with him  but he's my man so i'm committed to  justifying her rationalize that i accept  him as he is  the good and the bad together  and we we are settling down you know and  and that is that  um  [Music]  and  you know i think people live with a kind  of open-ended restlessness about their  friends that reflects their own open  ended recklessness pardon me it reflects  the open-ended restlessness they feel  when they look in the mirror and they  think about who they are themselves  maybe your friends can never  live up to your standards maybe your  friends will always be letting you down  maybe you'll always be disappointed with  who they are  and  whether that's something as simple and  palpable as you rely on your friends to  show up and practice tennis with you and  they're not as enthusiastic or motivated  about about tennis as you are or it's  something much more intellectually  sophisticated uh something much more  ambitious you're trying to accomplish  working with your friends and they're  they're they're letting you down again  and again you have some awareness if  only i had better friends  i could accomplish something better  again whether it's whether it's tennis  whether it's a political movement  whether it's publishing a literary  magazine uh some kind of collaborative  uh effort you're trying to make  it's not anyway  there are complex and simple ways  in which falling in love and being in a  commitment relationship  is enough for us is sufficient has a  finality it's  it's a total answer to the question of  your sexuality even if it's an unhappy  relationship even if it's a flawed  relationship even if you cheat on each  other or  some kind of polyamorous situation there  is a sense in which okay you had a  question and you found an answer  and  the very nature of commitment and  settling down that relationship it may  indeed mean that you accept things about  that partner that were not what you're  looking for that are contrary to your  own values that are contrary to your own  ideals but now you love them and love  itself leads you to overlook or accept  their their flaws  and i think friendship  [Laughter]  it is never reliable  in this way  i think friends instead are constantly  scrutinizing and evaluating one another  and i think that reflects the extent to  which we're constantly scrutinizing and  evaluating  ourselves  um  [Music]  you know  as much as our culture is fascinated  with the erotic instincts as much as it  dominates  film theater  song dance you know so much of our  culture is about sexuality nevertheless  we all have a sense of what is enough  you can have a sufficient marriage a  sufficient boyfriend or girlfriend  if you need to have two or three  boyfriends or girlfriends or you need to  have them of multiple genders or  whatever  still  you know there is a sense of a  sufficient  sexual relationship  and i don't think we ever really can  have enough  friendship you know whether that's  quantitative or  qualitative  um  [Music]  and i do think that's ultimately rooted  in a community building instinct  of yes wanting to have a troop  wanting to have a tribe  wanting to have a whole group of people  who will work together with you  um having people in your life that you  trust  to  watch over you when you're asleep to  gather firewood with you to store up  food with you people you would trust  enough to help you raise children that  you can leave your child with them that  they can babysit your your child and and  vice versa and  you know the scope of that  is infinite it's infinite both in  wanting to have a larger and larger  community of those trusting loving  cooperative people who are your friends  and i think it's also infinite in terms  of the depth of insight into that  person's character it's kind of an  infinite in terms of the escalating  levels of scrutiny  of are you really good enough for me are  you someone i can really trust  and of course we have progressed from  merely gathering firewood  to trying to publish poetry together  trying to make films together you know  do you really get me man do you really  understand my vision in making this film  you know do you and i really feel the  same way about vegan activism or ecology  or the reform of of parliament think for  a moment it's actually a really good  it's a really good example  think about the intense friendships that  emerged betwixt in between  people who were trying to abolish  slavery together  that's the side of it that's very rarely  told groups of friends changed the  history of the world i read recently  it's not worth telling the whole context  for why i read this chapter of history  but i read about the  legal struggle to abolish slavery in  scotland so at that time there was some  legal  independence of scotland as opposed to  england there still is some you know to  some extent of the same country but to  some extent they operate as separate  countries in separate legal systems  and  you can imagine right away there were  these really  passionate friendships amongst these men  as i read i don't think there was a  single woman involved these were you  know predominantly wealthy white men  who really felt black people should have  equality in scotland i mean i know  scotland wasn't the home of  that kind of racism but there were there  were some black slaves in scotland and  of course there were boats leaving and  arriving at their harbors that had black  slaves from africa on them and so on and  so forth and there were these men who  form very passionate friendships and you  can probably imagine also some of them  came out of a christian background and  some of them were really free thinking  atheist modern scientific thinkers and  they came together and they worked very  hard to mount this legal case what i  read about was just one  importantly okay that went on for years  of  you know trying to kind of prove the  humanity of slaves and to argue that  they ought to have equal rights  regardless of the color of their skin  and to in this sense undermine the legal  basis of of slavery in scotland um  now you know my point here is not that  anyone did that for  the sake of friendship maybe some did  maybe some people got involved and  contributed for years just because they  had a friend who already wasn't fall  well you know you know maybe some people  did you know but but my point is  that whole struggle i mean it's way  beyond  the level of trust and mutual admiration  and mutual appreciation it's way beyond  the the level of cooperation needed to  play tennis with people but still it is  demanding look i need you to wake up at  6 a.m so we can be there for 7 30 to  play tennis i said are you going to be  there for me are you going to keep up  your are you going to keep up your  commitments in this  in this friendship  you know it's asking it's asking a lot  of people and with the struggle like the  struggle to abolish slavery over many  years  um  you know  yeah  but my point here is ultimately negative  if those people hadn't become friends  none of them were doing it for money  right  when you talk about my my usual list of  motivations money fame power respect sex  they weren't doing it for money they  weren't doing it to get laid they're  pretending to get famous talk about  people really working together you know  when to write oh and  typeset and publish you know articles  and so on and to press this you know in  the  in the newspapers in the court of public  opinion and also in a court of law to do  that for years together i think that's a  it's actually a really kind of moving  example of the importance of friendship  and it's an example of the kind of  social progress  that would not have happened  without those friendships without a  particular number of friendships that we  probably could research and itemize  probably comes down to 20 guys who were  friends you know i might be even fewer  than that was it 15 was it 12 you know  that there were there were a few friends  who made this happen  um  and now you turn it around  and you look at our lives  of invidious  mutual isolation  and now think of all the things we could  have accomplished  if we had  at that level of profundity at that  level of mutual trust just 10 or 20  good friends